#summary Start Reading here!

= Introduction =

This set of Wiki pages is the documentation for the LWC11 language workbench competition described here: http://www.languageworkbenches.net/

The PDF below outlines a task that will be implemented with various different language workbenches: http://www.delphino-consultancy.nl/lwc/contest.html

The task is relatively trivial. But it has been designed to illustrate as many properties of language workbenches as possible. As such, it can serve as a good introduction to the respective tools.

This tutorial expects that you have heard about MPS and how it works in general before. We start almost at the beginning, but not quite :-)

= Detailed Documentation =

== Prolog ==

  * [http://code.google.com/p/mps-lwc11/wiki/DocuemntConventions Conventions] used in this tutorial
  * [http://code.google.com/p/mps-lwc11/wiki/SomeMPSBasics Basics] A couple of tipps and tricks for working with MPS. Recommended Reading!

== Phase 0 ==

  * [http://code.google.com/p/mps-lwc11/wiki/lwc11step1At01 Task 0.1] Build a simple data definition language to define entities with properties.
  * [http://code.google.com/p/mps-lwc11/wiki/lwc11step2At02 Task 0.2] Code generation to GPL such as Java, C#, C++ or XML
  * [http://code.google.com/p/mps-lwc11/wiki/lwc11step3At03 Task 0.3] Simple constraint checks such as name-uniqueness
  * [http://code.google.com/p/mps-lwc11/wiki/lwc11step4At04 Task 0.4] Show how to break down a (large) model into several parts, while still cross-referencing between the parts.

== Phase 1 ==

  * [http://code.google.com/p/mps-lwc11/wiki/lwc11step5At11 Task 1.1] Show the integration of several languages.
  * [http://code.google.com/p/mps-lwc11/wiki/lwc11step6At15 Task 1.5] Integrating manually written code (again in Java, C# or C++)
  * [http://code.google.com/p/mps-lwc11/wiki/lwc11step7At12 Task 1.2] Demonstrate how to implement runtime type systems.
  * [http://code.google.com/p/mps-lwc11/wiki/lwc11step8At13 Task 1.3] Show how to do a model-to-model transformation.
  * [http://code.google.com/p/mps-lwc11/wiki/lwc11step9At14 Task 1.4] Some kind of visibility/namespaces/scoping for references. 
  * Task 1.5 -- see above, we've moved it ahead
  * Task 1.6 -- not implemented since it would be exactly the same as 1.3

== Phase 2 ==

tbd

== Phase 3 ==

  * 







= Feedback = 

If you have feedback, suggestions, or some free energy to contribute, please contact Markus Voelter at mailto:voelter@acm.org