#summary Some tipps and tricks about how to work with MPS

Working with MPS is a little bit different because it is not an ASCII text editor but rather a projectional editor. Editing operations directly change the tree. Hence the editing gestures are quite a bit different. Also, sometimes you need to know where to look in order to achieve something. This page provides a couple of hints.

= Editing =

Editing is best shown with a screencast, because one can better show and explain how things work. We will add a screencast illustrating this in the near future.

There is one important thing, though: you can only ever enter what's available in the code completion menu (unless you're entering a string value, of course). Text you type is colored red, with a light red background until it is bound (by matching something in the code completion menu). So just typing along, everything being red, will lead nowhere.

You can use shift + cursor keys to select ranges. However, in many cases it is better to select "up the tree", because this is usually the unit of delete/copy/cut. You can use ctrl-up and ctrl-down to select along the tree hierachy.

Sometimes you have to use the intentions to achieve something. For example, making a java class abstract cannot be done by typing "abstract" before the class keyword. Rather, you have to use an intention. So it is often a good idea to try to press alt-enter and see if the intentions menu allows you to do what you wanted to do.

Also, some things (e.g. in the editor definition) must be specified in the inspector. Make sure it is always open (alt-2 or Window->Tool Window->Inspector).

Pressing enter in a cell adds another cell after the current one. Pressing Insert adds one before the current one.

= Checking =

If something does not work, you can always use Check Model or Check Language from the respective context menus. This will give you a list of all the errors in your code. 

= Debugging =

As of now, there is no real debugger that can be used the "meta programs", except the generation trace (see below). So you have to revert to "printf-debugging". In any base language program you can use the shortcut _sout_ to expand into a System.out.println() statement. To see the output, make sure you start MPS with java.exe, not javaw.exe. You can change this in the mps.bat file that starts MPS.

= Generation Trace =




